# Model Calibration

This document is intended to introduce the reader to calibration of the individually-based model (IBM), so the simulation, when spatial modeling is involved. The directions assume that work is being using a Linux workstation, or Windows workstation with [Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Subsystem_for_Linux) installed. Scripts referenced can typically be found in the [PSU-CIDD-MaSim-Support repository](https://github.com/bonilab/PSU-CIDD-MaSim-Support) and prior to running the scripts it will be necessary to add them to the `PATH`.

## GIS Data

By design the configuration of the simulation is flexible in terms what must be supplied as raster data and what can be supplied as a single value. In general, the following raster files are required to run the model spatially:
- Beta – The beta parameter determines, in part, how many additional infections occur as a result of a single infection and ultimately influences the *Pf*PR. These values must be calculated for each country based upon the inputs.
- Population – The model is initialized with the population values supplied in each of the cells in the raster. This file is mandatory when running spatially and can be generated by down sampling the spatial resolution a publicly available source while preserving the population count.
- *Pf*PR<sub>2-10</sub> – While not directly used by the IBM, a raster of the *Pf*PR values is needed as part of the beta raster generation.
The following raster files a may or may not be needed depending upon the configuration and research goals:
- Access to treatment: In the event that access to treatment is variable depending upon the location within the country, it is necessary to supply a raster file defining the percentage of infected individuals that seek / receive treatment.
- Climate or malaria seasonality: If there are multiple seasonal variations to the malaria season in the country, it is necessary to supply a raster file that links the cell to the seasonal equation to be used.
- Political divisions – Since results are recorded in connection to a political district or region, a file is required to supply these values. 
- Travel time or friction surface: Depending upon the movement algorithm selected, a travel time or friction surface is needed to ensure that individuals move in a reasonable fashion.

Once all of the GIS data has been acquired it and aligned, it is necessary to convert it to an [Esri ASCII raster format](https://desktop.arcgis.com/en/arcmap/10.3/manage-data/raster-and-images/esri-ascii-raster-format.htm) (`asc` extension) to be loaded into the model. 

## Database Preparations 

It is recommended that a new database be created for each country being studied. One of the limiting factors in the design of the database and IBM is that it presumes that the sequence of genotypes in each configuration file is the same. Once a new database has been created, the genotypes need to be loaded via the following command: 

`./MaSim -l -i [CONFIGURATION]`

## Beta Calibration

### Setting Bounds for Beta Alignment

Once the GIS files have been prepared, work can proceed to generation of the beta parameters.

1.	Begin by ensuring that all of the ASC format raster files are aligned correctly using `validateraster`  
    1.1. If they are not, it will be necessary to determine why they are not aligned correctly.  
    1.2. In general, rasters should be aligned to the population and *Pf*PR<sub>2-10</sub> rasters, based upon which one has the most complete information.

2.	Following alignment, the `generatebins` command should be run to generate the first calibration script to be run on the cluster this will set the bounds for when the betas are likely in relation to the *Pf*PR<sub>2-10</sub> values for the country.  
    2.1. First, run `generatebins` using the primary configuration file (e.g., `Studies/rwa-configuration.yml`).  
    2.2. Login to the cluster and create a directory do the calibration from (e.g., rwa-calibration).  
    2.3. Copy the following files to the cluster via sftp into the previously created directory:
    - From the country repository (e.g., PSU-CIDD-Rwanda) :
      - `Studies/out/calibration.sh`
      - `Studies/Calibration/rwa-calibration.yml`
    - From the support repository :
      - `bash/calibrationLib.sh`
      - `bash/manage.sh`
      - `bash/runCalibration.job`
      - `bash/template.job`
      - `bash/population.asc`
      - `bash/zone.asc`<br /><br />

    2.4. Being the control script via the following command: `qsub runCalibration.job`  
    2.5. During calibration be sure to monitor for any errors, in general if replicate files are not deleted by the management script the error log should be checked.

3.	Once all of the replicates have been run by `runCalibration.job` run the `createbetamap` command to load the calibration data from the database and create the first beta map.  

### Refining Beta Alignment

Once the bounds have been found it is necessary to reduce the epsilon values to an acceptable margin of error compared to the reference data. The is done by the iterating on the beta values using the reduceEpsilons.py script until the sub-national annual rates approximate reference values.

1.	Run the `createbetamap` command and note the maximum epsilon value output.  
   1.1.	If the value is outside of acceptable bounds, run the `reduceEpsilons` command using the maximum epsilon rounded down (e.g., if the maximum is 0.0314 then start with 0.01) and the same decimal place for the step value (i.e., 0.01 per the previous example).  
    1.2. The script will generate `out/reduction.csv` and `out/script.sh` which needs to be uploaded to the cluster.  
    1.3. Once the files have been uploaded run the job on the compute cluster.

2.	Once all of the replicates have run on the cluster, run the `createbetamap` script.  
    2.1. Note the maximum epsilon.  
    2.2. Examine the map of epsilon values (`out/epsilons_beta.asc`) and note the distribution of high epsilon values.  
    2.3. If they correspond to higher population areas repeat Step 1  
    2.4. If they are concentrated largely in low population areas proceed to Step 3.

3.	As the epsilon values are reduced, they need to be checked against the reference values by performing a validation run.  
  3.1. Using the beta map generated and the status quo parameters for the country, run the model at scale.
